ACTA is an agreement between national governments. It obligates them
to legislate in a particular fashion. It can’t be amended by their
legislatures, only accepted or rejected. It will be very expensive to
amend the agreement itself, as this would basically require unanimity
between the signatory states. ACTA never appeared on any election
manifesto, and has been driven by lobbyists working for concentrated
producer interests, using civil servants, and the executive branch of
governments to negotiate the details of future legislation behind the
backs of parliaments.

For me, this makes ACTA bad, even without considering its content or
effects.

It’s also a description true of … every European directive. The EU is
basically one generalised policy laundering machine.


-----------

How do you square support for democracy with this “anti-nationalism”?
Do you know how that makes you sound to a lot of Irish people? What
position can someone with such views take on the claims of other
conquered / colonised people who wish to run their own affairs? Is it
really democratic to say “you bunch of people who want to run your own
country are just not going to be allowed to; you’re going to have to
be bound, for no justifiable reason, by the decision of others”.

------------

@Jon,

I think there’s a danger of talking past each other.

The GLA example is a good one: what is necessary for the GLA / Mayor
to be legitimate is not that the electorate feel that they’re
Londoners (I don’t – I’ve only lived here five years), but that the
generality of them are happy to abide by decisions of a London-wide
majority. This is testable by opinion polling.

If a polity lacks legitimacy in this sense, then people will start
opposing its constitutional setup as such, as well as decisions taken
under it. And they’d be right: there’s less of a moral reason to obey
the law (particularly a bad law) if it’s not democratically
legitimate.

There are lots of mechanisms for dealing with trans-border issues
affecting multiple polities: Benvenisti’s book “Sharing Transboundary
Resources” is excellent on the effects of institutional setups on
common resources such as lakes. The EU is only one set of such
mechanisms, and a bad and unjustifiable one at that.

It is not the case that the generality of people, in any EU country,
are happy to be bound by an EU-wide majority on almost any subject
(except possibly the Eurovision Song Contest, which would be much
better conducted by Europe-wide voting). It follows that much of what
the EU does is rightly going to be regarded as illegitimate. Changing
the institutions won’t change people’s opinions quickly or greatly.

-------------

You’re saying those on the left should really be talking about “what a
more social EU would actually look like”.

The legitimacy problem can’t be just brushed aside. For the left to
talk about achieving a “social EU” is for the left to talk about
*illegitimately* achieving its objectives.

This is basic democratic / constitutionalist potty training. Movements
should *not* go about asking “hmm, how can we get what we want without
doing it democratically?”

*Any* discussion of what the EU should do is a discussion of how to
 avoid proper democratic scrutiny of a policy, and so there should be
 no such discussion until the legitimacy issues are resolved.


---------------

Changing the powers of the elected institutions in the EU is not going
to confer democratic legitimacy.

What is needed is for there to be a rough consensus amongst the
generality of the population in each Member State, that they are
prepared to be bound by the decisions of an EU-wide majority in the
areas with which the EU concerns itself. The EU is hopelessly short of
this sort of legitimacy.

To argue that this *isn’t* necessary puts one on the opposite side
from Home Rule in 1918, and on the Tory side in the American
Revolution.

----------------

@Ralf Grahn, this claim about referendum genies and farewell
deliberative democracy, whatever it is, is just rhetoric, isn’t it?
Has deliberative democracy collapsed in Australia given the rate of
referendums at one every two and a half years since Federation? No of
course it hasn’t; the very idea is preposterous and offensive in its
disregard for the facts.

I don’t get this argument about tax harmonisation. Most EU competences
are acquired not by treaty change but by treaty violation ratified by
the Luxembourg Court, which has fewer than ten times (maybe fewer than
three) in fifty years decided that a particular matter was outside the
EU’s competence. Not only do the Irish have to worry about competence
creep and a partisan judiciary, but horse-trading. It’s no good for
tax harmonisation to require unanimity if the Irish Government can
make a deal in COREPER trading off Ireland’s veto for something else.

Ralf, you are just setting up a straw man. I mentioned the Australian
system. As you will know (and if you didn’ know, how dare you not
bother finding out before replying to my post?), amendments to the
Australian federal constitution take the form of a parliamentary act
amending the constitution which may only come into force if ratified
at referendum.

In this case, the “methods of representative democracy” are employed
in addition to the referendum, so their superiority or otherwise is
irrelevant. The referendum check prevents a temporary legislative
majority on a particular question being able to entrench its position
when it is unrepresentative of the electorate as a whole.

(There is a slight difference, inasmuch as constitutional amendment
bills don’t require the consent of both houses, but in practice this
is irrelevant – I think they go through both houses anyway)

Why should the argument that governments and parliaments learn from
their mistakes not apply also the electorate as a whole?

----------------

@Jon Again, good to see an intellectually honest approach to EU
matters from the Europhile camp. I’m a little concerned that your
position is one of “democracy isn’t working too well at Member State
level, so there’s no point fixing anything at EU level”, which
presumably isn’t what you meant to say. As it happens, I think
democracy is working pretty well in most member states (the notes are
somewhere on my blog), is feasibly fixable at member state level, but
that there’s no prospect of adequate democracy at EU level.

There’s a logically prior question about *what* ought to be decidable
democratically at EU level.

Is there much evidence that citizens want to be bound by EU-wide
majorities on particular policy issues, e.g., quantitative studies,
broken down by policy area or country?

If there’s no demand for trans-EU majoritarianism, increasing the
powers of political institutions which can impose trans-EU policies is
only going to decrease the extent to which government is by consent,
and government without consent is unsustainable. Indeed, Europe’s main
supranational state, the United Kingdom, fell apart in the 1920s as
most of Ireland did not consent to being governed from London. Never
let it be said that supranationalism prevents war ;)

@Nils You say a legitimate EU democracy requires a directly-elected
executive. That’s setting the bar pretty high, as most Member States
have indirectly elected executives – all the constitutional monarchies
have to, and there are great parliamentary republics such as Germany
and Italy. There’s more than one legitimate structural model. We do
not, *always*, have to copy the French and the Americans.

@Mary Subsidiarity is, in practice, non-existent. To have actually
existing subsidiarity, you need an enforcement mechanism. I think the
enforcement mechanism needs to be judicial. (The ability of Member
State legislatures to be able to block Directives on subsidiarity
grounds is really a mechanism for preventing those legislatures from
blocking Directives on non-subsidiarity grounds such as legality). The
ECJ in Luxembourg has proven, beyond any doubt whatsoever, that it
cannot be trusted to enforce subsidiarity. I think it’s a waste of
time; subsidiarity was basically just borrowed out of Catholic Social
Teaching to help get Maastricht past the nay-sayers, and has never
been taken seriously by the authorities.


@Eurocentric My comments about the UK / Ireland were not 100% serious
:) I am as aware as you of the historical circumstances driving Irish
nationalism (for many it was originally a means to the end of agrarian
and other reforms) in the C19, and don’t really dissent from your
rebuttal, except to say that the EU *does* suffer from problems
analogous to those the UK faced in the 1910s: the majority of the
population of the UK no longer accepts the constitutional position of
the terms of the UK’s membership of the EU.

I’m not sure I saw you cite any quantitive data about democratic
consent for EU-level majoritarian ordering of particular policy areas.

As to national parliaments and subsidiarity, it’s a moot point given
that there’s no effective mechanism for rejecting EU legislation which
is ultra vires the Treaties, let alone EU legislation in areas of
legally legitimate EU competence which happen to violate subsidiarity.

Your point about subsidiarity being too political for judicial
decision is fair enough and I guess I agree.

---

@ Martin Keegan

I don’t think that judically-enforced subsidiarity can work.  it’s a
vague political concept and you can’t really enforce it through clear
legal rules.  it’s pretty much always a political decision , and it’s
too political for the courts to handle safely.

---

@Eurocentric My comments about the UK / Ireland were not 100% serious
:) I am as aware as you of the historical circumstances driving Irish
nationalism (for many it was originally a means to the end of agrarian
and other reforms) in the C19, and don’t really dissent from your
rebuttal, except to say that the EU *does* suffer from problems
analogous to those the UK faced in the 1910s: the majority of the
population of the UK no longer accepts the constitutional position of
the terms of the UK’s membership of the EU.

I’m not sure I saw you cite any quantitive data about democratic
consent for EU-level majoritarian ordering of particular policy areas.

As to national parliaments and subsidiarity, it’s a moot point given
that there’s no effective mechanism for rejecting EU legislation which
is ultra vires the Treaties, let alone EU legislation in areas of
legally legitimate EU competence which happen to violate subsidiarity.

Your point about subsidiarity being too political for judicial
decision is fair enough and I guess I agree.


------------

@Mr Violet

Is it reasonable to suppose that the EU might one day become
acceptably democratic? What grounds would there be for such a
conclusion? Is it reasonable to suppose this might happen within the
next few decades?

The majority of British people want less decision-making to be done at
EU level. If these opinions do not change, would it be democratic to
keep Britain in the EU, under the current or similar terms? Is it
democratic to keep preventing them from having a say on any
constitutional developments since Thatcher’s Single European Act?

It seems to me to be a contradiction in terms to want affairs within
the EU be conducted more in accordance with the wishes of citizens,
when the citizens don’t want affairs to be conducted within the EU in
the first place.

Is it logically consistent to say that it’s Ok for the USA, Ireland,
Scotland, Kenya, South Africa, Cyprus, Israel, Southern Rhodesia, etc
to become independent of the UK, but that it is not Ok for the UK to
be independent of the EU? (I mean, obviously, if one is just an
anti-English racist bigot, it’s intellectually consistent, but is it
intellectually consistent with a sane and reasonable world view?)

--------------

-------------------

More federalism in Jon’s argument seems to be the premise rather than
the conclusion, but he also doesn’t define what he means by it.

I can see at least three senses of federalism:

1) favouring more power for the federal government as against the
states; contrast “states rights”

2) favouring a de facto and de jure separation of competences between
federation and states, such that the one may not unilaterally revoke
the powers of the other; contrast “unitary government”

3) favouring the aggregation of states into large states

I think Jon is promoting federalism in senses 1) and 3)

The problem is sense 2), federalism as against unitary
government. Inherently, this sort of federalism implies an enforceable
limitation on government power: you have to be able to go to the
courts and have legislation declared invalid on grounds that it was
enacted at the wrong level of government. And *that* implies that
courts have a power to declare legislation invalid at all.

The UK, France, and the EU do not, in practice, have courts which
behave like this. Has any citizen *ever* had an EU directive declared
outside the power of the EU, by the ECJ? The absence of ex post review
of legislation in the French and UK traditions has prevented the
development of federal systems in those polities, and in any polities
which adopted their traditions, such as the EU. The American practice
of ex post review, dating to 1803, has allowed the entrenchment of
federal vs state powers in the USA, and been copied in Canada,
Australia etc. Germany is more similar to the American rather than
Anglo-French tradition in this respect.

So, the EU is a unitary rather than federal polity: the ECJ doesn’t in
practice practise ex post review, and MEPs hold the idea of exclusive
member state competences in open contempt. The contrast with America
is again striking: American conservatives have no trouble opposing
federal gay marriage bans on states rights grounds.

So. The constructors of the EU have brought about a situation where
there *can* be no enforceable division of competences between the
federal and member state governments. An extremist minority persists
in attempting further *deliberate* transfers of competences to federal
level, and nothing can stop them.

We should now turn to the Moravcsik fallacy, i.e., that the sorts of
powers exercised by the EU are of a type which *should* not be
exercised democratically. Classic examples are the ECB and the
Commission’s anti-trust enforcement operation. If all the EU’s
competences are of this sort, then the democratic deficit is not just
non-existent, it is actually desirable.

Of course, it’s also an argument for abolishing pretty much all EU
competences *other* than the ones which ought not to be exercised
democratically.

Moravcsik’s approach is useful: the adequacy of the EU’s democratic
mechanisms should be considered on a competence-by-competence
basis. What he doesn’t say is that the EU’s record, when considered
this way, is pathetic and embarrassing. The radically unitary
character of the EU’s allocation of competences means that the record
will deteriorate over time and further delegitimise the polity.

Well done, guys.

------------

@Richard Laming: you’re conflating ex post review of legislation with
review of executive action.

I should have been clearer: the ECJ has almost never (only once?) said
that a piece of legislation has been ultra vires the powers of the EU
vs the member states. It has indeed, as you say, said that individual
bodies such as the Commission have acted ultra vires, but that is not
the same thing (the position of the UK courts is analogous: what’s
being overturned is executive action, not legislation).

Citizens do sometimes have standing to challenge things before the
ECJ; again, I believe this a dead letter in practice.

I don’t agree that MS governments are always incentivised to stand up
for MS legislative competence as against the EU. The Council
horse-trading process allows them to sidestep legislative and other
political opposition domestically.

-----------

Changing the powers of the elected institutions in the EU is not going
to confer democratic legitimacy.

What is needed is for there to be a rough consensus amongst the
generality of the population in each Member State, that they are
prepared to be bound by the decisions of an EU-wide majority in the
areas with which the EU concerns itself. The EU is hopelessly short of
this sort of legitimacy.

To argue that this *isn’t* necessary puts one on the opposite side
from Home Rule in 1918, and on the Tory side in the American
Revolution.

-----------

I’d love to see a source for the claim that the EU Parliament’s
internal rules require proportional representation. You just made that
up, right? How could it be enforced? How was the UK compliant before
the closed list system was introduced? How is the Republic of Ireland
compliant now?

-------

Hello, thanks for the clarification and sorry for flying off the
handle back there. I still can’t believe it, even though I’ve now read
the relevant provisions of 2002/772/EC.

I don’t think we should give in to the slack British usage of
“proportional representation” to include preferential systems like
STV. Sadly the Council Decision contains this usage as well.

Anyway, on your substantive point: are you saying that basically some
of the MEPs from the UK, albeit they be elected, are in practice not
subject to the threat of losing their seats on account of voters’
dislike of their legislative activity?

Doesn’t this undermine the democratic legitimacy of the laws they
pass?

------

I think proportionality is grossly overemphasised in the British
debate; there are people who have difficulty opening their minds to
the proposition that it may not be the sole criterion for assessing
electoral systems. In Australia, proportional representation as a term
is used contrastively with “preferential”. See the appendix to this
AEC publication. Hence my confusion.

When I wrote about legitimacy, I was referring to the legitimacy of
the laws passed by the MEPs, not the MEPs themselves; you don’t really
address that in your response.

-------

Jon, I don’t think you get out of it that easily.

The input legitimacy here is, as you say, some function of the roles
of the Commission, Council and Parliament, but you can’t pretend that
it’s somehow irreducible and immune to analysis. The Parliament’s
contribution is perfectly capable of being discussed even if it is not
the whole story.

My assessment is that the Commission has no democratic mandate
whatsoever in respect of the generality of legislative proposals it
initiates. I had a question asked in the Parliament about the
democratic mandate for two specific measures, and all they
condescended to say was that they had the legal authority to pursue
the measures, which is to refuse to answer the question. The UK
Government has the legal authority to enact a highly regressive income
tax or legalise fox hunting, but quite the opposite of a democratic
mandate to do so.

The Council and attendant institutions operate largely unscrutinised
by national parliaments (practice varies widely), and sometimes in
formal defiance of the scrutiny reserve, and sometimes even in
secret. In general, EU members are parliamentary democracies whose
executives are not directly electorally accountable, and whose conduct
of external relations is among the least reviewable of their
activities. I believe it unusual for parties (at least in the UK) to
campaign in national elections on their proposed actions in Council.

So now back to the EU Parliament: what is the effect on the input
legitimacy of EU legislation as a whole, given the near-guaranteed
status of some members by “virtue” of closed lists? Obviously the UK
stands as one of the world’s best examples of a democracy with
unelected politicians (I appreciate that you would prefer it were
unelected politicians restricted to … err … the upper echelons of the
Civil Service). Yet we have the Parliament Acts, and strong norms of
deference to the elected chamber. In other countries, however, even
this excuse doesn’t obtain. You can point at national law and say it
ought to be obeyed because everyone had a chance to influence it
through their vote, but you can’t say that as strongly in the case of
EU law. The legislative outcome may satisfy an EU-wide majority (the
Byzantine legislative procedures must be credited for achieving that),
but for the minority, you can’t demand their loyalty in the same way
as you can in polities where democratic control is considerably
tighter.

---------

Thanks for coming back to this. You say don’t follow my point, but I’m
more asking a question. Every time I asked it, you said “let’s ask a
different question”. I’m quite happy to look into your questions too,
but I find it odd that you won’t answer mine – I think what’s going on
is that you’ve not gone back and read the whole discussion from the
top.

The question is: what effect has the near-certain re-election of some
MEPs upon the input legitimacy of EU legislation?

Do you deny that the one undermines the other?

We both seem to agree that the input legitimacy of EU legislation is a
function of all the elements of the EU legislature: Parliament,
Council and Commission. You seem to want to refuse to discuss this
analytically (in the strict sense of breaking something down into its
constituent parts, though obviously to some extent one has to consider
the interaction between these three parts). You keep saying “well,
what about the effect upon legitimacy of [something other than MEPs'
incentives]“.

-------------------

Leaving the EU and staying in are both unknowns. By default, leaving
the EU means staying in the EEA, EFTA, ECHR and WTO and in NATO so the
UK would continue to be bound by the associated rules. Supporters of
EU withdrawal will be able to conflate the benefits of EU withdrawal
with the benefits of withdrawal from EEA, EFTA, and, sadly, ECHR,
unless there’s a particularly long lead-up to the referendum.

I count myself as someone who thinks the UK should withdraw from the
EU, and indeed that the EU should be abolished, but simultaneously as
someone who supports making the EU more democratic, even if that makes
it harder to withdraw. The EU withdrawalists owe it to the public to
produce the 1000 page document setting out the cost-benefit analysis
of withdrawal, but this is very expensive. It’s not as though EU
conservatives (that is, those who want to remain members) have
produced a comprehensive analysis of the benefits of the status quo,
however, so there is fault on both sides.

We will end up with a snap referendum, like the AV referendum, where
the racist lies on both sides are repeated for a few short weeks and
then the public votes on an undebated proposition. Imagine what it’s
like, coming from a country which uses AV, and being told you’re not a
democracy.

Jon, you are right to question whether a referendum is the right
mechanism. In countries with sensible constitutions (that is, Ireland,
Australia, Japan and a few others), constitutional change can only be
effected by referendums, so the public are accustomed to being
consulted on constitutional matters, and can rest secure that their
country’s constitution cannot be subverted by a temporary majority
among politicians. In the UK, however, the tradition is to effect
changes to the constitutional relationship with external powers such
as the EU by stealth or deceit: there was no election or referendum
about joining the EU (unlike in newer member states), there was one
referendum about the terms of membership, and no further consultation
about constitutional changes effected by treaty or judicial
malpractice. On the contrary, Brown ratified the Lisbon Treaty having
falsely promised a referendum on its predecessor treaty.

If it’s Ok to lie to the public about whether they’ll get a referendum
on constitutional changes, and Ok to join the EEC without an election
or referendum, it’s Ok to just withdraw without a referendum
either. It’s not like anyone would believe David Cameron’s promise of
a referendum anymore anyway.

I’m sure that some of the Europhiles were delighted by the farce of
the AV referendum, as it will have discredited referendums in general.

The benefit of doing things by referendum is that it counteracts the
ability of the business lobby to capture the political parties to
prevent the withdrawal decision being taken.

--------

To clarify what I meant by staying in the EU being an unknown:

The EU is becoming unstable: the failure of the Euro is undeservedly
going to discredit the EU more generally, as will failures over
immigration. This is for reasons similar to Dani Rodrik’s trilemma of
the world economy: you can have only two of democracy, national
sovereignty and economic integration (though as it happens, I disagree
with him).

The EU has no mechanism to prevent it from acquiring ever-increasing
competences, nor any mechanism for subjecting these to democratic
control. It follows that it is stuck on a collision course with the
right of people to control their own lives, so opposition to it will
increase.

The question is whether an orderly subjection of the EU to democratic
discipline and the rule of law is still possible, or whether it will
break apart chaotically and peacefully like the Soviet Union. We have
a situation where 27 national elites hold vetos on all sorts of
matters, which in a real crisis will prove as paralytic as the old
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth system of giving every single
aristocrat a veto on everything.

As a proportion of world trade, the EU is declining, so the incentives
to get outside the tariff wall and trade freely with the rest of the
world will only increase. If the UK were to leave, it would be doing
so at a time when other member states would also be considering their
options. There may well be a widespread acceptance that the current
arrangements haven’t worked, and a willingness to be much more
flexible with member states fed up with full EU membership.

I’d be unsurprised if Germany didn’t just lose patience with the EU
one day and abruptly quit, whilst the Brits were still trying to fudge
an evolutionary compromise on their way away from the centre of the
EU.

---------

This article is a work in progress. It has no structure yet. It
dissolves into note form at the end. Please check back later for a
complete version. Variations in terminology between EU, EC and EEC are
deliberate but of marginal importance.

The European Union's particular model of European integration is not
by any means the only one possible. In an ideal world, I would prefer
a federal Europe, but whether or not that were possible, I would
abolish the EU and start again from scratch. The EU is criticised by
the right wing in the United Kingdom; much as I share their objectives
of loosening the UK's ties to the EU, I cannot agree with their naïve
assertion that the EU is becoming a federal superstate, or their
arguments from sovereignty. ( include here introductions to the other
paragraphs )

The EU is often characterised as an embryonic "federal superstate". It
is no such thing, at least by any conventional definition of
federalism or any reasonable comparison with federal states elsewhere
in the world. Federal entities typically have a well-defined division
between the responsibilities of the federation and its member states,
and the responsibilities for external relations, defence and the bulk
of general taxation tend to lie at the federal, rather than state,
level. In these terms, the EU/EC is almost the diametric opposite of a
federation: there is no effective division of responsibilities, and
foreign affairs and tax are handled at the state level. The real
legislative power in the EC is also held by the member state
governments acting together, rather than by some sort of "European
government". If the EU is a federation, it is upside-down.

The other Eurosceptic argument is the one from sovereignty: the EU
undermine's the UK's sovereignty or independence and is therefore
automatically a bad thing. Fair enough, if sovereignty is a wholly
good thing, which it isn't necessarily. Ultimately I just don't think
that national sovereignty is of paramount importance, certainly not of
the importance in which it is impliedly held by the proponents of this
argument. The converse position, which holds that globalisation makes
sovereignty irrelevant, is just as logically flawed as an argument for
EU membership. No, it is a different aspect of self-government which
should be the focus of the argument: democracy.

Democracy is where the EU/EC is particularly weak. Fundamentally,
there is no "people" whose collective will the EU institutions can (be
said to) express. If there is a polity represented by the EU
institutions, it is merely the collectivity of officials and
politicians of the Commission and member states. There is no
pan-European media. There is no way for European citizens to influence
decision-making by the Commission, Parliament or Council. European
Parliamentary elections are fought on national issues, and in most
cases the electoral system does not permit the easy removal of
individual parliamentarians, which significantly reduces their
responsiveness to constituents. Increasing the powers of the European
Parliament will not make the EU substantially more democratic. Being
more distant, both geographically and politically, from their
constituents makes the European Parliamentarians more susceptible to
lobbying than Bnational politicians.

Of course, some lobbying is in the public interest. National
parliaments have a much longer tradition of democracy (indeed in
Britain, Ireland and Sweden this tradition is unbroken in living
memory), and NGOs have established themselves with close links to
these bodies; no such tradition of close civil society links exists in
respect of the European Parliament or Commission, and the barriers to
their establishment are much higher.

European directives (blueprint laws saying what member states laws
should provide) are the main species of European legislation. The
legislative activity is undertaken by threee institutions: the
Commission, the Parliament and the Council. Nothing passes except by
permission of the Council, which contains representatives of the
governments of the member states, not their parliaments. Parliamentary
control of executive foreign/external policy-making is often an area
of weakness, but the rôle of member state governments in the Council
is a new extreme. The outcome of European legislative processes is
regarded as outside the scope of domestic political contestability; by
making an issue a matter of treaty obligation, European member state
governments may, when acting collectively, reduce the scope of
permitted domestic political activity. Anyone wishing to challenge
European policy outcomes must resort to the nuclear option of
breaching the European treaties by non-compliance or withdrawal. The
effect of the institutional arrangement is that legislative power is
transferred to the executive of member states, and democratic scrutiny
is reduced.

harmonisation

Democracy is more than a set of properties of avoting system - as a
philosophy of governance it also incorporates notions of transparency
and accountability. The European Council fails badly on transparency -
much of its business is conducted in secret. It is not unique as a
legislative body in sitting in secret - apparently this is done in
North Korea as well.

normative legitimacy

If the benefit of membership of the EC is liberalised access to
markets, why should the UK remain a member if the WTO achieves
comparable results on a global scale? Why indeed should the EC
continue to exist? The initial question perhaps presupposes a false
premise, that benefits of membership are exclusively economic. A
striking difference between the EU and WTO régimes is that the EU has
an active social policy. The EU and and its predecessors make some
effort to compensate the losers in the liberalisation/globalisation
game. The original ECSC compensated the employees of inefficient pits
closed due to integration, with training and relocation grants, and
the principle has remained that the EU will attempt to regulate the
capital flows unleashed by liberalisation. For better or worse, EC
social policy now encompasses consumer and employee protection, all on
the rationale of the harmonisation necessary for liberalisation of
market access. The WTO does no such thing. It should be noted that EC
social spending was from the 1970s explicitly intended as a panem et
circenses method of winning public support.

Moreover, the EU actually works in terms of its stated procedures. The
EU has rules, and the rules are to a great extent followed. This is
not to say that the EU is a haven of rule-abidingness remotely
approaching the levels of reliability and predictability which obtain
in the Anglosphere, but it does have enforcement procedures which
people expect to work. The structure of WTO negotiations do not permit
all affected parties sufficient voice or influence, and the
enforcement of WTO rules is skewed towards interests in the United
States, the most egregious recent example being the labelling of cheap
Vietnamese imports as dumping.

EuropeanLaw?

what directives really do

shared tradition of culture, but not economics and governance /
cultural genocide

inability to confine itself to purpose / constantly moving target /
teleology

Unlike well-functioning federal polities, the EC has no working
demarcation between federal and state competences. EC law is held (by
the EC institutions) to take precedence over the law of the member
states. In theory, however, EC law is limited in its "sphere of
competence" - it should only cover commercial policy, trade, tarriffs,
free movement of persons and so on. In practice the notion of "spheres
of competence" has no limiting effect on the scope of EC law, which
spills out over national law as a result of the aforementioned
supremacy of EC law over conflicting national provisions. This did not
matter for the first few decades of the EEC's existence, until 1986,
because member state governments had an effective veto on all EC
legislation, so its relationship with national law was much less
problematic.

mechanisms transfer power from parliaments to national governments

decisions are not reviewable, often on logically inconsistent grounds

the Directive is not reviewable because it is addressed to the Member
State; the MS implementation of the Directive is not reviewable
insofar as it is necessary for MS compliance with the Directive
(that's from the POV of an individual through the Courts)

MS legislators are in the same boat - the policy embodied in the
Directive cannot be reviewd once passed, yet no attempt is made to
restrain ministerial discretion in the Council

prior national legislative restraint on EC reps would completely
change EC governance

In some EU Member States, citizens may so distrust their national
political (or judicial) institutions that the EU institutions may
appear to constitute a preferable alternative. This is a view born of
ignorance or prejudice - an alternative need not always be better than
something which is bad

Articulating the view that national institutions, in general, or those
of a particular member State, are better than EU ones is hampered by
the fac tthat many of the MSes are nations, and nations have a bad
name. Delcaring the superioritry of some national instuttion is too
easily conflated with declaring the superiority of some racial, ethnic
or cultural identity. In federaionts such as the US, Germany or
Australia, supporting teh states (as against teh federation) is at
worst a form of parochialism, and is never a coded call for organised
mass murder.

The EP is a weak player in the European scene. Euroboosters point to
it as a demonstration of the supposed democratic nature of the
EU. Doubtless they did not bother trying to do so before the EP was
popularly elected body, but claims that some democratic element is
situated in the EP are largely false, at least insofar as "democratic"
is not coterminous with "elected".

    EP elections not fought on EU issues low turnout outcomes of
    elections don't matter unrepresentative on EU constitutional
    issues no pan-EU media no pan-EU polity / political consciousness

EP more susceptible to lobbying than national parliaments. Remoteness
and diffuseness favour concentrated interests even more than national
parliaments.

The idea behind a federal system of government is that a division be
maintained between two different "levels" of government. This division
is normally a substantive one - which policy are federal, which one
state - rather than a procedural one (you can only tax up to such and
such a level, or have such an such a criminal penalty if you do it at
the state level).

I'm going to take it for granted that federalism is an end in itself -
that we should prefer the outcomes of a governmental system with an
in-built dividsion of responsibilities - though I believe that it is
possible to justify a preference for federalism over unitary
ogvernment in utilitarian terms.

It is generally the case that in functioning federal systems, the
following statements are all true:

    the constituent states are geographical units almost all the
    population lives in one or other of the States - geographical
    territory within the F but outside the States has only limited
    population the reallocation of powers as between the F and the
    States may only be effected with the consent of both. (there are
    lots of States, so generally some supermajority thereof suffices)
    the boundary between F and S power is policed by politicians and
    the Courts. It is a mark of a well-functioning federal system that
    mainstream politicians pronounce themselves opposed to policies
    they would otherwise support on the strength of federalism alone

Witness Governor Schwarzenegger's recent declaration of his opposition
to a federal ban on gay marriage on the grounds that such a ban should
be underatekn at the State level. The position of the American
conservatives goes even further: a federal ban on gay marriage is not
only unconstitutional, but America should not amend its Constitution
to alter that fact.

The contrasts with the European political system is instructive and
shocking: the generality - let alone the mainstream - of MEPs believe
the federal / state boundary should be moved in favour of the federal,
or should be abolished entirely. Some commentators go so far as to
accuse MEPs of choosing policies on the basis of their expected effect
on the F/S boundary, rather than on their individual merits.

To the extent that their opinions differ from the public at large on
the question of F/S competences, the MEPs are unrepresentative of
their constituents, which detracts from their democratic
legitimacy. More subtly, it calls into question the processes which
led to the "representation" of the public by people who disagree with
them so sharply on a fundamental constitutional issue.

It is sometimes asserted that the EP constitutes some sort of
democratic check on the EU legislative process (or executive). It
can't introduce or repeal the law it (sometimes) has a rôle in
"passing"; moreover, in practice it doesn't vote laws down, only
amends them.

Analysing the changes in the division of responsibilities between F
and S is to concentrate on only one relation in a two-dimensional
system. The other critical relation is that between national
governments and national parliaments. Participation in the European
system drastically alters the balance struck [here], in favour of
governments. Directives adopted by the Council of Ministers are
effectively binding on national legislatures. Any powers which can be
transferred to the Council thus

The logic of harmonisation

------

Of course originally the Government claimed that most of the new
treaty was just a "tidying-up exercise", not important enough to
warrant a referendum, until not having a referendum started to become
a political liability. So if you're a UK voter, you are thus faced, in
the words of Tom Koerner, with proposals "simultaneously so minor that
they are unworthy of your attention and so important that failure to
pass them will lead to unspeakable catastrophe."

But what is interesting and concerning is the presentation of the
evolution of EU treaties as a matter on whose details the electorate
has no voice: "You can vote aye or no to this treaty, but if you vote
no, you'll be kicked out and won't get a chance to vote aye to an
amended proposal incorporating your concerns". You can't vote for any
Europe other than the one on offer, and if you don't, there'll be a
catastrophe.

---------

The reason is that basically no-one actually thinks the EU, as
currently constituted, is in any way a good idea. Whether one says
this publicly is a matter of how one wishes to be perceived. In the
UK, support for the EU is basically a way of signalling that one is
against nationalism, facism, racism, traditionalism, various forms of
conservatism, etc. Opposition to the EU has often been *perceived to
have been* dominated by undesirable types, and certainly the UK's only
substantial racist party is highly Eurosceptic (except inasmuch as it
sees the EU as an instrument for encouraging immigration by white
people).

The common perception of Euroscepticism is wrong, like so many common
perceptions.

So: there was no-one to have my argument with. The most committed
Europhiles basically privately admit the entire thing is a catastrophe
and work diligently for its reform.

My 11 points in that article fall into three categories: the absence
of most features of Europe-level democracy (in the last five years I
have formalised this into testable questions), the misdesign and
misbehaviour of actors (legislators, officials, judges) in the
European lawmaking processes, and the undesirable effects this all has
on policy outcomes.

So as Abraham Lincoln didn't ask, can a government neither of the
people, nor by the people, nor for the people, long endure?

I see no reason to believe that it could. Either democracy will come
to the EU, and so radically transform it as it no longer retain any
meaningful identity with the constitutional structures we see today,
or countries will vote to withdraw.

The effect of the undemocratic operation of the EU is to transfer
resources and power to people who would not otherwise receive them. It
is irrational for any group of people to tolerate this
indefinitely. Ireland didn't tolerate being governed from London in
1920, and I suppose the current rule from further east will be equally
unwelcome. Most countries formerly controlled by the UK obtained their
independence peacefully, and if independence is good enough for
Canada, for Nigeria, for India and the rest, why is independence not
good enough for the UK?

I expect it will be the Germans whose patience snaps first though.



